Hello everyone and welcome to
the next lecture in the SQL Appendix.
So in this lecture we're going to be going
over wildcard, ORDER BY, GROUP BY, and
then aggregate functions.
All in SQL with Python and Pandas.
So just like in the last video,
we're going to start by importing sqlite,
importing pandas as pd, making our
connection using sqlite3.connect.
And then either your pathway to your
database, or your database name,
if it's saved in the same folder.
Then you can set your
function as sql_to_df.
Again, this function uses
pandas to pass a SQL query.
Use the connection from SQLite 3 and
then returns the data frame.
So before we begin with wildcards,
ORDER BY and
GROUP BY we're gonna take a quick
look at aggregate functions.
These should be super
familiar from pandas, but for
SQL, you can just call any of
these aggregate functions,
such as average, count, first,
last, max, min and sum.
The descriptions are right
there in the bullet points.
For instance, average as you would expect,
returns the average value, that AVG.
And you can call any of these
aggregate functions on a column
to get the resulting values back
basically like you would in pandas.
So to count the number of customers
we'll send a query called SELECT COUNT,
and then we'll count customer_id
from customer table,
and then if we pass that down, it'll count
the total number of customers there.
Great, so go ahead and experiment
with the other aggregate functions.
The usual syntax is SELECT
column_name comma then your
aggregate_function passed
on the column name.
Then FROM table_name WHERE, and
let's say your column name does something,
or whatever you decide.
Or you can do it without a WHERE operator.
Now moving on to SQL wildcards,
these are a little different.
A wildcard character can be used to
substitute for any other characters in
a string, so in SQL wildcard characters
are used with the SQL LIKE operator and
there will be an exception to that,
which we'll go over later.
The LIKE operator is used in
a WHERE clause to search for
a specified pattern in a column.
So there's several wildcard operators.
On this table you can see the three
main wildcard operators here.
There's the percentage sign and
that's used as a substitute for zero or
more characters.
There's the underscore which is used
as a substitute for a single character.
And then you can make
a character list in brackets and
that sets in ranges of
characters to match.
So let's see them in action.
First the percentage wildcard.
In this case, I wanna select any
customers whose name starts with an M.
To do that, my query looks like this.
It says SELECT * FROM customer,
that table,
WHERE, this is where the wildcard
statement happens, I'm gonna say,
WHERE my column, first_name,
is LIKE and then,
the statement will be a capital M and
then, a % sign.
That percentage sign will
basically tell the query,
look through the first name column
where any value starts with an M and
the percentage sign is a wildcard for
any values after M.
So here we grab it and
pass it through our function, and
now I see all my customers that
have M starting their first names.
So Mary, Maria, Margaret,
Michelle, Melissa, etc.
Great.
So now we'll see the underscore wildcard,
so let's say I wanna select
any customers whose last name ends
with one letter and then I-N-G.
To do that, I would say,
just like the last query,
SELECT everything FROM customer WHERE
my last name_column is LIKE _ING.
And in this case, there was one person,
King, Melissa King, has one letter,
as a wildcard, ING.
If I wanted to do a search for anyone
who had a last name ending on ING no
matter how many letters came in front of
it, that's when I would pass the %ING.
And notice all these wildcard statements
are enclosed in single quotes.
So if I scroll up here,
this was also enclosed in single quotes.
Now I'm gonna move on to
the character list wildcard.
There's an important
thing to note with this.
Sine we're using SQLite it's a little
different then other SQL formats such
as MySQL.
So in MySQL you would use something
around WHERE your value LIKE and then you
would pass your character list and then
a percentage sign all in single quotes.
and SQLite what you use is the WHERE
value and then instead of writing LIKE
you write GLOB, and then charlist*
instead of the percentage sign.
So, to show you what I mean by that,
let's say I wanna select any customers
whose first name begins with an A or a B.
I'll SELECT everything FROM the customer
table WHERE first_name column,
and instead of LIKE now, I say GLOB
since we're using SQLite with Python.
And then my character list, AB, so
you just pass your characters
as a string all put together,
AB, in brackets, and then an asterisk
enclosed by single quotes.
And that's how you do a character list
in SQL with Python pandas and SQLite.
Great.
So now let's go ahead and
dive into SQL ORDER BY.
So the ORDER BY keyword is used to sort
the result set by one or more columns.
The ORDER BY keyword sorts the records
in ascending order by default, and
if you wanna do it in descending order,
you can use the DESC keyword, stands for
descending.
The syntax for this looks like this.
You SELECT the column FROM the table, and
then you say ORDER BY whatever column
name you wanna order by, and then you
can specify ascending or descending.
So let's say I want to
select all customers and
order the results by last name.
What does that query look like,
it looks a little like this.
SELECT * FROM customer, and
then I ORDER BY the last_name.
So now if we look at just what the head
of that data frame looks like after
passing it through our function,
we can see here the last_name.
They're all ordered in alphabetical order.
Great, so it's basically almost
like a sort or order in pandas.
If I wanted to select all customers and
order the results by last_name descending,
I would do the exact same thing,
but after ordering by the last_name,
I would pass DESC for descending.
And now you can see the last_name goes
in reverse alphabetical order, or
descending alphabetical order.
Finally, let's look at GROUP BY.
So, the GROUP BY statement is used,
usually,
with an aggregate function to group
the results by one or more columns.
Syntax usually looks like this.
It says SELECT your column name.
And then your aggregate
function on a column name.
FROM your table.
And then usually ask for a WHERE
statement, so WHERE your column name and
then some sort of operator and
then your value.
And then you GROUP BY that column name.
So let's say I wanted to count
the number of customers per store.
And I wanted to group
them by the store_id.
How could I do that?
If we see the query here,
I SELECT my column store_id,
I want to count the number of customers or
customer_id column FROM the customer table
and then I want to GROUP BY the store_id.
And this should be really familiar
from the pandas GROUP BY statements.
It's basically the same thing.
And here now I've grabbed it using SQL,
grouped it by the store_id.
So that's it for now.
We learned about SQL wildcards,
ORDER BY, GROUP BY, and
then the aggregate functions.
And that's it for now.
Great, okay, thanks guys.